This first draft of design discussion (#3)
thotz/cosi-driver-ceph: WORKFLOW.md

_below is more like open disscussion than a design doc_
### Introduction

The following CRDs are defined for managing the lifecycle of Buckets:

 - BucketRequest - Represents a request to provision a Bucket
 - BucketClass - Represents a class of Buckets with similar characteristics
 - Bucket - Represents a Bucket or its equivalent in the storage backend

 The following CRDs are defined for managing the lifecycle of workloads accessing the Bucket:

 - BucketAccessRequest - Represents a request to access a Bucket
 - BucketAccessClass - Represents a class of accessors with similar access requirements
 - BucketAccess - Represents a access token or service account in the storage backend

Simialr to CSI, it has three running components :
- Controller - mananges life cycle of COSI objects, watches for the requests for above mentioned objects

> - Node adapter - bootstraps bucket access request to applications for their worloads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Node adapter - bootstraps bucket access request to applications for their workloads
```

> - Sidecar/Driver - receives the request and calls corresponding api in the driver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sidecar/Driver - receives the request and calls corresponding API in the driver
```

More details and defintions can be found the [COSI Spec](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/container-object-storage-interface-spec/blob/master/spec.md)

### Workflow

> - BucketRequest(namespace scoped) can be created with reference to a BucketClass, so user will get a Bucket(clusterscoped). The COSI driver will create a `backend bucket` in RGW for a Bucket Request

Reviewer: namespace-scoped and cluster-scoped are both two-word adjectives that therefore need hyphenated.
Let's not use grave ticks normally used for inline code on terminology. Italics, bold, or quotes (what I suggested below) are more appropriate there.

```suggestion
- BucketRequest(namespace-scoped) can be created with reference to a BucketClass, so user will get a Bucket(cluster-scoped). The COSI driver will create a "backend bucket" in RGW for a Bucket Request.
```

> - BucketRequest(namespace scoped) can be created with reference to a BucketClass, so user will get a Bucket(clusterscoped). The COSI driver will create a `backend bucket` in RGW for a Bucket Request

Reviewer 2: why do we need to create an actual bucket in RGW in this case?
if no one would access this bucket, it could be left at a CRD level.
this would solve the issue of deciding which user creates and own the bucket?

> - BucketAccessRequest(namespace scoped) can be create with reference to a BucketAccessClass and BucketRequest, so user will get a BucketAccess(clusterscoped).The COSI driver will create a `s3 user` with proper access

Reviewer: I also don't think S3 user is a COSI-specific term that needs to be called out separately.

```suggestion
- BucketAccessRequest(namespace-scoped) can be created with a reference to a BucketAccessClass and BucketRequest, so user will get a BucketAccess(cluster-scoped). The COSI driver will create an S3 user with proper access.
```

> - BucketAccessRequest(namespace scoped) can be create with reference to a BucketAccessClass and BucketRequest, so user will get a BucketAccess(clusterscoped).The COSI driver will create a `s3 user` with proper access

Reviewer 2: we should also support the case where we use an exiting S3 use. we can have deployments with a very large number of buckets, and we probably don't want to create as many users.

Reviewer: COSI does support this "brownfield" use-case by allowing admins to create a COSI "Bucket" manually. We should make sure we understand what COSI enforces onto its drivers and what options we have within Rook for implementation. I don't think it's a bad decision to create a new user for each access, as this could allow for easier management around who has access if someone's access needs to be revoked.

Reviewer 2: my comment is not only for the brownfield case. tying the number of users to the number of bucket accesses may pose a problem to the RGW. the mechanism for support a very large number of buckets may not be present in the case of users.

Author: Is there any known limit for users can be accessed per bucket?
 Currently as per my understanding, `BucketRequest` is an abstraction over backend Bucket and There can be multiple `BucketAccessRequest` referring to a `Bucket`(CRD) created by `BucketRequest` and applications in k8s will assign `BucketAccess`(should refer to backend user IMO)  @jeffvance : Any more comments?

Reviewer 3: @thotz a COSI cluster-scoped `Bucket` instance is an abstraction of a backend bucket. A `BucketRequest` (BR) is a user request to create a new (greenfield) backend bucket. A `BucketAccessRequest` (BAR) is a user request to access an existing backend bucket, and the cluster-scoped `BucketAccess` (BA) instance is an abstraction of this access. Multiple BAs can reference the same `Bucket` instance, and multiple BARs can reference the same BR as long as they are in the namespace of the BR.

Reviewer 2: so, going back to the discussion of users and bucket.
* creating a Bucket, is just a definition, and does not need to create an actual bucket in the RGW
* creating a BucketRequest would need to include an S3 user name (maybe as part of the opaque parameter map) so that not all buckets are created by some hardcoded user
* creating a BucketAccessRequest creates an S3 user and grants them access to this bucket. Note that the BAR also has map of opaque data, so, in theory, if an S3 user is provided there, a new user does not need to be created for each BAR, and an existing user may be reused. in this case, the driver may fetch the access and secret keys via `radosgw-admin` and return them in the reply

Reviewer 3: > creating a Bucket, is just a definition, and does not need to create an actual bucket in the RGW

COSI expects the driver to attempt to create a backend bucket and, if successful, return its unique bucket ID. Note: COSI also expects the driver to be idempotent such that if the backend bucket already exists, the driver returns a status indicating that the bucket exists and did not need to be created.

> creating a BucketRequest would need to include an S3 user name (maybe as part of the opaque parameter map) so that not all buckets are created by some hardcoded user

Not correct. COSI created buckets are not owned by the BR. They are owned by the driver and when the BAR is processed the driver grants access to that request. Also note that a BR does not have a map.  I'm not sure where you've seen this but please send me a link so we can correct it. 

> creating a BucketAccessRequest creates an S3 user and grants them access to this bucket. Note that the BAR also has map of opaque data, so, in theory, if an S3 user is provided there, a new user does not need to be created for each BAR, and an existing user may be reused.

The BAR does _not_ have a map (same comment as above for the BR). The BAR references a `BucketAccessClass` (BAC) and optionally a ServiceAccount. If the SA name is omitted then the driver will most likely mint a new user.

Reviewer 2: @jeffvance thanks for clarifying!

> COSI expects the driver to attempt to create a backend bucket and, if successful, return its unique bucket ID.
> ... Not correct. COSI created buckets are not owned by the BR. They are owned by the driver

This means that the admin user is the owner to all of the buckets?

> Note: COSI also expects the driver to be idempotent such that if the backend bucket already exists, the driver returns a status indicating that the bucket exists and did not need to be created.

According to [this](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/radosgw/s3/bucketops/#put-bucket) the operation is idempotent, but does not give an indication that the bucket already exists.

>  I'm not sure where you've seen this but please send me a link so we can correct it.

OK, I hope I found the right place now. Just want to verify it is [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/container-object-storage-interface-api)?

> The BAR does not have a map (same comment as above for the BR). The BAR references a BucketAccessClass (BAC) and optionally a ServiceAccount. If the SA name is omitted then the driver will most likely mint a new user.

OK. So, this would probably be done by adding bucket policies by the admin user.

Reviewer 4: I think Casey will write more, but this does seem problematic.  In AWS, buckets are owned by a controlling account (tenant), and this is a basic abstraction COSI would need to support a service bureau style of operation.  RGW has operated at a multi-tenant scale for years.

Reviewer 4: (I'm worried that we need to have a discussion around this in the COSI upstream.)

Reviewer 5: > @jeffvance thanks for clarifying!
> 
> > COSI expects the driver to attempt to create a backend bucket and, if successful, return its unique bucket ID.
> > ... Not correct. COSI created buckets are not owned by the BR. They are owned by the driver
> 
> This means that the admin user is the owner to all of the buckets?

* rgw defaults to a limit of 1000 buckets per user, and has some known scaling issues past that
* for purposes of quota, all objects in a bucket are attributed to the bucket's owner. so this strategy means we can't offer meaningful per-user quota enforcement

Author: @jeffvance did a nice write-up for the cosi workflow which help to understand bit more about COSI https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-XwQ3ZbGU_vqsl2rwQQIg1hSEvvjNaOqlqiRFGEuqQo/edit#

Author: > @jeffvance thanks for clarifying!
> 
> > COSI expects the driver to attempt to create a backend bucket and, if successful, return its unique bucket ID.
> > ... Not correct. COSI created buckets are not owned by the BR. They are owned by the driver
> 
> This means that the admin user is the owner to all of the buckets?

I had this discussion with COSI team regarding the ownership. So I can answer this question, above is one way to do it. Another approach is set to make relation with BucketClass. There is will an owner for all the Buckets(Greenfield case)  referring to that BucketClass. This owner will be created upon first BucketRequest. We can also details about this owner in the `Opaque` field of BucketClass() if needed. And one more thing the opaque field will only be available in `BucketClass` or `BucketAccessClass` not in `BucketRequest` or `BucketAccessRequest` due to portability issue(using same BR/BAR when app is ported to different cluster/enviroment). I don't fully understand reason for the same 

> 
> > Note: COSI also expects the driver to be idempotent such that if the backend bucket already exists, the driver returns a status indicating that the bucket exists and did not need to be created.
> 
> According to [this](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/radosgw/s3/bucketops/#put-bucket) the operation is idempotent, but does not give an indication that the bucket already exists.
> 
> > I'm not sure where you've seen this but please send me a link so we can correct it.
> 
> OK, I hope I found the right place now. Just want to verify it is [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/container-object-storage-interface-api)?
> 
> > The BAR does not have a map (same comment as above for the BR). The BAR references a BucketAccessClass (BAC) and optionally a ServiceAccount. If the SA name is omitted then the driver will most likely mint a new user.
> 
> OK. So, this would probably be done by adding bucket policies by the admin user.

- 
### COSI Driver

> The `user credentials` and `endpoint` need to passed as `Kubernetes Secret` to the Driver. Using that details, the driver will perform bucket operations via S3 apis and user operations via rados-admin Ops apis. 

Reviewer: Driver is referenced with a capital here but not elsewhere. Keep consistent.
API is an acronym that needs capitalized.
Be sure to spell out the full version of terms when they are first being used.

```suggestion
The user credentials and endpoint need to passed as Kubernetes Secret to the driver. Using these details, the driver will perform bucket operations via S3 APIs and user operations via RADOS Gateway administrator operations (RGW admin ops) APIs. 
```

### Consuming at application
The app pod can refer BucketAccessRequest and Node adapter details as volume mount as follows:
```yaml
spec:
  containers:
      volumeMounts:
        - name: cosi-secrets
          mountPath: /data/cosi
  volumes:
  - name: cosi-secrets
    csi:
      driver: objectstorage.k8s.io
      volumeAttributes:
        bar-name: sample-bar
        bar-namespace: default
```

> The adapter bootstrap the credentials into application pod, for Ceph COSI Driver credentials passed as `.aws/credentials` file into the pod.

Author: This was the intention, but I saw the file as `/data/cosi/credentials.json` not in `.aws/credentials`. May be I need to understand it bit more

> The adapter bootstrap the credentials into application pod, for Ceph COSI Driver credentials passed as `.aws/credentials` file into the pod.

Reviewer: I'm having a hard time understanding this sentence. I have a suggestion based on what my understanding is, but it may not be correct.

```suggestion
The COSI adapter sidecar injects the Ceph driver's credentials into the application pod into the mount path given (/data/cosi in the above example).
```

> ### Integrating with Rook

Author: Not sure this will as simple as it sounds. Even I am not sure how many instance of controller, driver, node adapter is needed

> The controller, node adapter and sidecar/driver need to deployed via Rook. Rook also need to create a `cephobjectstoreuser` and refer the secret in the deployment.

Reviewer 6: > The controller, node adapter and sidecar/driver need to deployed via Rook.

Let's expand this section more. Here are some questions:
- What image(s) need to be deployed for the controller, node adapter, and sidecar/driver? 
   - Does K8s create images for COSI, like it does for CSI? Or is COSI a library and we need to build our own images? If we need to build the images what needs to be in the base image? I wonder if we just need a simple s3 client, and if we need the ceph base image.
- How many of each of those pods are needed? 
   - Is there just one controller, or are there two instances for HA, or perhaps configurable?
   - Is the node adapter a daemonset (on all nodes)?
   - Is the sidecar/driver deployed with the controller pod, node adapter pod, or independently?

> Rook also need to create a `cephobjectstoreuser` and refer the secret in the deployment.

Is this user for administration of all the buckets created by the object store? Or is there one user per bucket? Is there a naming convention for the secret? Is there something we can re-use from the OBC implementation?

Author: Thanks for the questions. I will try to answer the following according to my best knowledge
> > The controller, node adapter and sidecar/driver need to deployed via Rook.
> 
> Let's expand this section more. Here are some questions:
> 
>     * What image(s) need to be deployed for the controller, node adapter, and sidecar/driver?
>       
>       * Does K8s create images for COSI, like it does for CSI? Or is COSI a library and we need to build our own images? If we need to build the images what needs to be in the base image? I wonder if we just need a simple s3 client, and if we need the ceph base image.

As of now, there are different images for the controller, node adapter and sidecar/driver. I hope like CSI, the COSI will be part of k8S and we don't need to build those images our own and the driver image will come from ceph-cosi-repo. @jeffvance / @krishchow .
> 
>     * How many of each of those pods are needed?
>       
>       * Is there just one controller, or are there two instances for HA, or perhaps configurable?
>       * Is the node adapter a daemonset (on all nodes)?
>       * Is the sidecar/driver deployed with the controller pod, node adapter pod, or independently?

This part even I am not quite(abt no of pods) maybe we refer current CSI design and check with them for their ideas.  In my dev set up I used only one instance of each of them didn't experiment much with it
AFAIK the node adapter needs to be present on all the nodes. The sidecar/driver deployed independently

> 
> 
> > Rook also need to create a `cephobjectstoreuser` and refer the secret in the deployment.
> 
> Is this user for administration of all the buckets created by the object store? Or is there one user per bucket? Is there a naming convention for the secret? Is there something we can re-use from the OBC implementation?

In the current code, the User is the kind of administrator who creates all the buckets as part of the `BucketRequest` it receives and also creates users on receiving `BucketAccessRequest`. But I tend to change this (more alike OBC implementation) create a new user for `BucketRequest` and create the bucket using that new user.

> The controller, node adapter and sidecar/driver need to deployed via Rook. Rook also need to create a `cephobjectstoreuser` and refer the secret in the deployment.

Reviewer: I don't think it's accurate that they need deployed via Rook. It is true only that they need deployed. If Rook deploys them, that is part of this design, and we should be clear that it is a design decision we are making. We could choose another alternative to have a Ceph-COSI standalone operator deploy these. We should consider the pros/cons of the available options in this design.

Similarly, Rook does not need to create a `CephObjectStoreUser` (please use camel case for this). Rook could create a user directly using the RGW admin API and not create a `CephObjectStoreUser`. Again, we should provide a pro/con discussion of the options to explain why we have selected certain directions.

```suggestion
The controller, node adapter and sidecar/driver need to be deployed. This design proposes that Rook deploy these components for a Rook-Ceph cluster. This design also proposes that Rook create a `CephObjectStoreUser` and refer to the credentials secret created by that controller.
```

I'm not sure creating a `CephObjectStoreUser` is the best decision for the COSI implementation. That means Rook's COSI driver will have to wait for the `CephObjectStoreUser` to be created by a separate controller. It also means a Rook user might see a `CephObjectStoreUser` that they did not create and delete it without knowing it was created for COSI and cause problems. I think it is safest to create the user in the COSI driver code.

Author: @BlaineEXE : I agree that COSI-Driver should have a standalone implementation and it needs user credentials and rgw endpoint as a k8s secret for the AdminOps library or S3 API to work. If we deploy it via Rook(purely in Rook not anywhere else) I thought we can consume `cephObjectStoreUser` which will encode the needed information as k8s secret.
